Introduction to vectorization with Vector128 and Vector256 (#84115)
dotnet/runtime: docs/coding-guidelines/vectorization-guidelines.md

      - [Custom config](#custom-config)
      - [Memory alignment](#memory-alignment)
        * [Enforcing memory alignment](#enforcing-memory-alignment)
        * [Memory randomization](#memory-randomization)
  * [Loops](#loops)
    + [Scalar remainder handling](#scalar-remainder-handling)
    + [Vectorized remainder handling](#vectorized-remainder-handling)
    + [Access violation testing](#access-violation-av-testing)
  * [Loading and storing vectors](#loading-and-storing-vectors)
    + [Loading](#loading)
    + [Storing](#storing)
    + [Casting](#casting)
  * [Mindset](#mindset)
    + [Edge cases](#edge-cases)
    + [Scalar solution](#scalar-solution)
    + [Vectorized solution](#vectorized-solution)
  * [Toolchain](#toolchain)
    + [Creation](#creation)
    + [Bit operations](#bit-operations)
    + [Equality](#equality)
    + [Comparison](#comparison)
    + [Math](#math)
    + [Conversion](#conversion)
    + [Widening and Narrowing](#widening-and-narrowing)
    + [Shuffle](#shuffle)
  * [Summary](#summary)
    + [Best practices](#best-practices)

TL;DR: Go to [Summary](#summary)

# Introduction to vectorization with Vector128 and Vector256

> Vectorization is the art of converting an algorithm from operating on a single value at a time to operating on a set of values (vector). It can greatly improve performance at a cost of increased code complexity.

Reviewer: Perhaps clarifying that it is the number of values operated on "per iteration"?
```suggestion
Vectorization is the art of converting an algorithm from operating on a single value per iteration to operating on a set of values (vector) per iteration. It can greatly improve performance at a cost of increased code complexity.
```

> In recent releases, .NET has introduced many new APIs for vectorization. The vast majority of them are hardware specific, so they require users to provide an implementation per processor architecture (x64 and/or arm64), with the option of using the most optimal instructions for hardware that is executing the code.

Reviewer: Consider expanding the list of architectures to more explicitly call out what we support today. This helps show the breadth of support we have:
```suggestion
In recent releases, .NET has introduced many new APIs for vectorization. The vast majority of them are hardware specific, so they require users to provide an implementation per processor architecture (such as x86, x64, Arm64, WASM, or other platforms), with the option of using the most optimal instructions for hardware that is executing the code.
```

> .NET 7 introduced a set of new APIs for `Vector128<T>` and `Vector256<T>` for writing hardware-agnostic, cross platform vectorized code. The purpose of this document is to introduce you to the new APIs and provide a set of best practices.

Reviewer: We also introduced `Vector64<T>` at the same time. `Vector512<T>` is being introduced in .NET 8.

It might also be worth a small addendum that while all these have "software fallbacks" not all of them may be vectorized on all platforms. `Vector64<T>` is only accelerated on Arm64 today and `Vector256<T>` only on "newer" x86/x64.

`Vector128<T>` is the "common denominator" across all platforms that support vectorization (and this is expected to always be the case).

## Code structure

`Vector128<T>` represents a 128-bit vector of type `T`. `T` is constrained to specific primitive types:

* `byte` and `sbyte` (8 bits).
* `short` and `ushort` (16 bits).
* `int`, `uint` and `float` (32 bits).
* `long`, `ulong` and `double` (64 bits).

> * `nint` and `unit` (32 or 64 bits, depending on the architecture)

Reviewer: These two are new to .NET 7. They are not supported on .NET 3.1, 5, or 6.

.NET 8 is introducing a `Vector128<T>.IsSupported` that helps identify whether a given `T` will throw or not to help identify what works per runtime, including from generic contexts.

A single `Vector128` operation allows you to operate on: 16 (s)bytes, 8 (u)shorts, 4 (u)ints/floats, or 2 (u)longs/double(s).

```
------------------------------128-bits---------------------------
|             64                |               64              |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
|      32       |      32       |      32       |      32       |
----------------------------------------------------------------|
|  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
| 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
```

> `Vector256<T>` is twice as big as `Vector128<T>`, so when it is hardware accelerated, and the data is large enough, you should use it instead of `Vector128<T>`. To check the acceleration, use `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` and `Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated` properties.

Reviewer: This can be tricky advice. It being larger isn't necessarily always a win due to various "quirks" that exist in the underlying implementation.

Namely, `Vector256<T>` on x86/x64 is mostly treated as `2x Vector128<T>` and while there are some operations that can "cross lanes", they can sometimes be more expensive or have other hidden costs.

So while it can often be a win to switch when the data is large enough, there are some algorithms where that "breaks down" and it can end up being much slower.

> The size of the input also matters. It needs to be at least of the size of a single vector to be able to execute the vectorized code path. `Vector128<T>.Count` and `Vector256<T>.Count` return the number of elements of the given type T in a single vector.

Reviewer: There are some advanced tricks that can allow you to operate on such data (that is when you have less than vector's worth of data), but they can be tricky to get right.

Both APIs are turned into constants by the Just-In-Time compiler (i.e. no method call is required to retrieve the information). In the case of pre-compiled code (NativeAOT), this is not true for the `IsHardwareAccelerated` property, as the required information is not available at compile time.

That is why the code is very often structured like this:

```cs
void CodeStructure(ReadOnlySpan<byte> buffer)
{
    if (Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector256<byte>.Count)
    {
        // Vector256 code path
    }

>     else if (Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<byte>.Count)

Reviewer 2: This will lead to two length comparisons for small data if both vectors are accelerated. For implementations that expect small inputs to be common, they'll often guard both sections with the 128 length check so that small data doesn't pay for both and you instead only pay for two checks if vectorization will happen, e.g.
```C#
void CodeStructure(ReadOnlySpan<byte> buffer)
{
    if (!Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated || buffer.Length < Vector128<byte>.Count)
    {
        // scalar code path
    }
    else if (!Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated || buffer.Length < Vector256<byte>.Count)
    {
        // Vector128 code path
    }
    else
    {
        // Vector256 code path
    }
}
```

Reviewer 3: Out of curiosity: will PGO here re-arrange the conditions based on actual input-length present?

    {
        // Vector128 code path
    }
    else
    {
        // non-vectorized && small inputs code path
    }
}
```

**Both vector types provide almost identical features**, but arm64 hardware does not support `Vector256` yet, so for the sake of simplicity we will be using `Vector128` in all examples and assuming **little endian** architecture. Which means that all examples used in this document assume that they are being executed as part of the following `if` block:

```cs
else if (Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<byte>.Count)
{
    // Vector128 code path
}
```

### Testing

Such a code structure requires us to **test all possible code paths**:

* `Vector256` is accelerated:
  * The input is large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector256`.

>   * The input is not large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector256`, but it can benefit from vectorization with `Vector128` (when `Vector256` is accelerated then `Vector128` and smaller vectors are also).

Reviewer 2: The "when `Vector256` is accelerated then `Vector128` and smaller vectors are also" assumption is worth calling out earlier in the doc when describing IsHardwareAccelerated.

    }

    [Benchmark]
    public bool Contains()
    {
        ReadOnlySpan<int> buffer = new (_pointer, (int)Size);
        return buffer.Contains(1);
    }

    [GlobalCleanup]
    public void Cleanup() => NativeMemory.AlignedFree(_pointer);
}
```

Sample results (please mind the AVX2, AVX and SSE4.2 information printed in the summary):

```ini
BenchmarkDotNet=v0.13.5, OS=Windows 11 (10.0.22621.1413/22H2/2022Update/SunValley2)
AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 3945WX 12-Cores, 1 CPU, 24 logical and 12 physical cores
.NET SDK=8.0.100-alpha.1.22558.1
  [Host]    : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT AVX2
  Scalar    : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT
  Vector128 : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT AVX
  Vector256 : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT AVX2
```

```
|   Method |       Job | Size |       Mean |    StdDev | Ratio | Code Size |
|--------- |---------- |----- |-----------:|----------:|------:|----------:|
| Contains |    Scalar | 1024 | 143.844 ns | 0.6234 ns |  1.00 |     206 B |
| Contains | Vector128 | 1024 | 104.544 ns | 1.2792 ns |  0.73 |     335 B |

> | Contains | Vector256 | 1024 |  55.769 ns | 0.6720 ns |  0.39 |     391 B |

Reviewer 2: For an initial example, I think it'd be worth using an example that showcases best possible results, e.g. for Int32, we'd "expect" 4x difference between Scalar and Vector256, which we're not getting here.  Otherwise, it breeds questions / confusion in the mind of a reader.  What's the reason it's only a 30% improvement rather than a 4x improvement?  Can we fix that for the example, even if it's just making the input longer?  (Especially since below you say that this is "the best case scenario".)

Author: > Can we fix that for the example, even if it's just making the input longer?

Sure, I'll try to come up with a better example.

Reviewer: Doing `Add` between two arrays/spans is a good example. It doesn't require any fancy operations and typically hits the actual `Count * faster`

Author: I've been thinking about it a little bit more and I got to the following conclusion: it's not easy to find a built-in .NET method that provides a perfect perf boost thanks to vectorization. Even simple methods like `IndexOf` and `Contains` don't provide it for buffers of small primitive types.

That is why such boost might be rare and we should simply point the users to the right profilers which can tell them where the CPU time is spent.

I've added following sentece below the table with the results:

> **Note:** as you can see, even such simple method like [Contains](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.memoryextensions.contains) **did not observe a perfect performance boost**: x8 for `Vector256` (256/32) and x4 for `Vector128` (128/32). To understand why, we would need to use a profiler that provides information on CPU instruction level, which depending on the hardware could be [Intel VTune](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/vtune-profiler.html) or [amd uprof](https://developer.amd.com/amd-uprof/).

@stephentoub @tannergooding thoughts?

```

The results should be very stable (flat distributions), but on the other hand we are measuring the performance of the best case scenario (the input is large and its entire contents are searched through, as the value is never found).

Explaining benchmark design guidelines is outside of the scope of this document, but we have a [dedicated document](https://github.com/dotnet/performance/blob/main/docs/microbenchmark-design-guidelines.md#benchmarks-are-not-unit-tests) about it. To make a long story short, **you should benchmark all scenarios that are realistic for your production environment**, so your customers can actually benefit from your improvements.

##### Memory randomization

The alternative is to enable memory randomization. Before every iteration, the harness is going to allocate random-size objects, keep them alive and re-run the setup that should allocate the actual memory.

> You can read more about it [here](https://github.com/dotnet/BenchmarkDotNet/pull/1587). It requires an understanding of what distribution is and how to read it. It's also out of scope of this document, but [Pro .NET Benchmarking](https://aakinshin.net/prodotnetbenchmarking/) has two chapters dedicated to statistics and can help you get a very good understanding of the subject.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what our guidelines are for plugging for-pay content.

Reviewer 4: perhaps "a book on statistics, such as .." ? Maybe there's another one to mention as an alternative.

{
    Debug.Assert(Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<int>.Count);

    // The initial sum is zero, so we need a vector with all elements initialized to zero.
    Vector128<int> sum = Vector128<int>.Zero;

    // We need to obtain the reference to first value in the buffer, it's used later for loading vectors from memory.
    ref int searchSpace = ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(buffer);
    // And an offset, that is going to be used by vectorized and scalar loops.
    nuint elementOffset = 0;
    // And the last valid offset from which we can load the values
    nuint oneVectorAwayFromEnd = (nuint)(buffer.Length - Vector128<int>.Count);
    for (; elementOffset <= oneVectorAwayFromEnd; elementOffset += (nuint)Vector128<int>.Count)
    {
        // We load a vector from given offset.
        Vector128<int> loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, elementOffset);
        // We add 4 integers at a time:
        sum += loaded;
    }

    // We sum all 4 integers from the vector to one
    int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

    // And handle the remaining elements, in a non-vectorized way:
    while (elementOffset < (nuint)buffer.Length)
    {

>         result += buffer[(int)elementOffset];

Reviewer 2: Just FYI:
https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/83349
Not suggesting you change anything in your description or code based on that, though.

        elementOffset++;
    }

    return result;
}
```

**Note:** Use `ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(span)` instead of `ref span[0]` and `ref MemoryMarshal.GetArrayDataReference(array)` instead of `ref array[0]` to handle empty buffer scenarios (which would throw `IndexOutOfRangeException`). If the buffer is empty, these methods return a reference to the location where the 0th element would have been stored. Such a reference may or may not be null. You can use it for pinning but you must never dereference it.

> **Note:** The `GetReference` method has an overload that accepts a `ReadOnlySpan` and returns mutable reference. Please use it with caution!

Reviewer 2: Everything on MemoryMarshal is considered unsafe and needs to be used with caution.

Reviewer 2: You might also call out why you chose to use MemoryMarshal.GetReference rather than `ReadOnlySpan<T>.GetPinnableReference`, which does return `ref readonly`.

        {
            return true; // return true if a difference was found
        }
    }

    // If any elements remain, process the last vector in the search space.
    if (buffer.Length % Vector128<int>.Count != 0)
    {
        loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, oneVectorAwayFromEnd);
        if (Vector128.Equals(loaded, values) != Vector128<int>.Zero)
        {
            return true;
        }
    }

    return false;
}
```

`Vector128.Create(value)` creates a new vector with all elements initialized to the specified value. So `Vector128<int>.Zero` is equivalent to `Vector128.Create(0)`.

`Vector128.Equals(Vector128 left, Vector128 right)` compares two vectors and returns a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on if the provided elements in left and right were equal. If the result of comparison is non zero, it means that there was at least one match.

### Access violation (AV) testing

Handling the remainder in an invalid way may lead to non-deterministic and hard to diagnose issues.

Let's look at the following code:

```diff
nuint elementOffset = 0;
while (elementOffset < (nuint)buffer.Length)
{

>     loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, elementOffset);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, elementOffset); // BUG!
```

Writing tests that detect that issue is hard, but not impossible. The .NET Team uses a helper utility called [BoundedMemory](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/Common/tests/TestUtilities/System/Buffers/BoundedMemory.Creation.cs) that allocates a memory region which is immediately preceded by or immediately followed by a poison (`MEM_NOACCESS`) page. Attempting to read the memory immediately before or after it results in `AccessViolationException`.

## Loading and storing vectors

### Loading

Both `Vector128` and `Vector256` provide at least five ways of loading them from memory:

```cs
public static class Vector128
{
    public static Vector128<T> Load<T>(T* source) where T : unmanaged;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadAligned<T>(T* source) where T : unmanaged;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadAlignedNonTemporal<T>(T* source) where T : unmanaged;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadUnsafe<T>(ref T source) where T : struct;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadUnsafe<T>(ref T source, nuint elementOffset) where T : struct;
}
```

> The first three overloads require a pointer to the source. To be able to use a pointer in a safe way, the buffer needs to be pinned first. This is because the GC cannot track unmanaged pointers. It needs help to ensure that it doesn't move the memory while you're using it, as the pointers would silently become invalid. The tricky part here is doing the pointer arithmetic right:

Reviewer 2: > To be able to use a pointer in a safe way, the buffer needs to be pinned first.

Pinning is only required for managed objects, because managed objects live on a GC heap, and the GC can move those objects around.  You could have a pointer to something that's not managed, though.  We should clarify this text.

Currently .NET exposes only one API fo allocating unmanaged aligned memory: [NativeMemory.AlignedAlloc](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.nativememory.alignedalloc). In the future, we might provide [a dedicated API](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/27146) for allocating managed, aligned and hence pinned memory buffers.

The alternative to creating aligned buffers (we don't always have the control over input) is to pin the buffer, find first aligned address, handle non-aligned elements, then start aligned loop and afterwards handle the remainder. Adding such complexity to our code is hardly ever worth it and needs to be proved with proper benchmarking on various hardware.

The fourth method expects only a managed reference (`ref T source`). We don't need to pin the buffer (GC is tracking managed references and updates them if memory gets moved), but it still requires us to properly handle managed pointer arithmetic:

```cs
int ManagedReferencesSum(int[] buffer)
{
    ref int current = ref MemoryMarshal.GetArrayDataReference(buffer);
    ref int end = ref Unsafe.Add(ref current, buffer.Length);

>     ref int oneVectorAwayFromEnd = ref Unsafe.Subtract(ref end, Vector128<int>.Count);

Reviewer 2: This is a GC hole if buffer.Length < `Vector128<int>.Count`.

Author: @stephentoub would adding `Debug.Assert(Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<int>.Count);` as I did in other methods solve the problem?

Reviewer 2: Yes (making it clear to a reader what our assumptions are for callers of this method.)

    Vector128<int> sum = Vector128<int>.Zero;

    while (!Unsafe.IsAddressGreaterThan(ref current, ref oneVectorAwayFromEnd))
    {
        sum += Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref current);

        current = ref Unsafe.Add(ref current, Vector128<int>.Count);
    }

    int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

    while (Unsafe.IsAddressLessThan(ref current, ref end))
    {
        result += current;

        current = ref Unsafe.Add(ref current, 1);
    }

    return result;
}
```

> **Note:** `Unsafe` does not expose a method called "IsGreaterOrEqualThan", so we are using a negation of `Unsafe.IsAddressGreaterThan` to achieve desired effect.

Reviewer 2: > `Unsafe` does not expose a method called "IsGreaterOrEqualThan"

I think it'd be clearer to say "does not expose a method call "IsLessThanOrEqualTo"", as those are the semantics of the loop in question and also the negation of `IsAddressGreaterThan`.

Author: Great catch!

    if (equals == Vector128<TValue>.Zero)
    {
        currentSearchSpace = ref Unsafe.Subtract(ref currentSearchSpace, Vector128<TValue>.Count);
        continue;
    }

    return ...;
}
while (!Unsafe.IsAddressLessThan(ref currentSearchSpace, ref searchSpace));
```

It was part of `LastIndexOf` implementation, where we were iterating from the end to the beginning of the buffer. In the last iteration of the loop, `currentSearchSpace` could become a pointer to unknown memory that lied before the beginning of the buffer:

```cs
currentSearchSpace = ref Unsafe.Subtract(ref currentSearchSpace, Vector128<TValue>.Count);
```

And it was fine until GC kicked right after that, moved objects in memory, updated all valid managed references and resumed the execution, which run following condition:

```cs
while (!Unsafe.IsAddressLessThan(ref currentSearchSpace, ref searchSpace));
```

Which could return true because `currentSearchSpace` was invalid and not updated. If you are interested in more details, you can check the [issue](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/75792#issuecomment-1249973858) and the [fix](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/75857).

> That is why **we recommend using the overload that takes a managed reference and an element offset. It does not require pinning or doing any pointer arithmetic!**

Reviewer 2: But still requires care; you can still pass in an incorrect offset and get a GC hole.

```cs
public static class Vector128
{
    public static void Store<T>(this Vector128<T> source, T* destination) where T : unmanaged;
    public static void StoreAligned<T>(this Vector128<T> source, T* destination) where T : unmanaged;
    public static void StoreAlignedNonTemporal<T>(this Vector128<T> source, T* destination) where T : unmanaged;
    public static void StoreUnsafe<T>(this Vector128<T> source, ref T destination) where T : struct;
    public static void StoreUnsafe<T>(this Vector128<T> source, ref T destination, nuint elementOffset) where T : struct;
}
```

For the reasons described for loading, we recommend using the overload that takes managed reference and element offset:

```cs
public static void StoreUnsafe<T>(this Vector128<T> source, ref T destination, nuint elementOffset) where T : struct;
```

**Note**: when loading values from one buffer and storing them into another, we need to consider whether they overlap or not. [MemoryExtensions.Overlap](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.memoryextensions.overlaps#system-memoryextensions-overlaps-1(system-readonlyspan((-0))-system-readonlyspan((-0)))) is an API for doing that.

### Casting

> As mentioned before, `Vector128<T>` and `Vector256<T>` are constrained to a specific set of primitive types. `char` is not one of them, but it does not mean that we can't implement vectorized text operations with the new APIs. For primitive types of the same size (and value types that don't contain references), casting is the solution.

Reviewer 2: > `char` is not one of them

Currently.  There's been some discussion of just letting it work.

[Unsafe.As<TFrom, TTo>](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.compilerservices.unsafe.as#system-runtime-compilerservices-unsafe-as-2(-0@)) can be used to get a reference to supported type:

```cs
void CastingReferences(Span<char> buffer)
{
    ref char charSearchSpace = ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(buffer);
    ref short searchSpace = ref Unsafe.As<char, short>(ref charSearchSpace);
    // from now on we can use Vector128<short> or Vector256<short>
}
```

Or [MemoryMarshal.Cast<TFrom, TTo>](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.memorymarshal.cast#system-runtime-interopservices-memorymarshal-cast-2(system-readonlyspan((-0)))), which casts a span of one primitive type to a span of another primitive type:

```cs
void CastingSpans(Span<char> chars)
{
    Span<short> shorts = MemoryMarshal.Cast<char, short>(chars);
}
```

It's also possible to get managed references from unmanaged pointers:

```cs
void PointerToReference(char* pUtf16Buffer, byte* pAsciiBuffer)
{
    // of the same type:
    ref byte asciiBuffer = ref *pAsciiBuffer;
    // of different types:
    ref ushort utf16Buffer = ref *(ushort*)pUtf16Buffer;
}
```

> We should avoid doing this in the opposite direction, as most engineers will assume that unmanaged pointers are already pinned.

Reviewer 2: I'd state this differently: it's only safe to convert a ref to a pointer if it's known that the ref is already pinned.  If it's not, the moment after you get the pointer it could be invalid.

## Mindset

Vectorizing real-world algorithms seems complex at the beginning. And what do software engineers do with complex problems? We break them down into sub-problems until these become simple enough to be solved directly.

Let's implement a vectorized method for checking whether a given byte buffer consists only from valid ASCII characters to see how similar problems can be solved.

> 

Reviewer 2: Left off here... will pick up again later today...

* `short` and `ushort` (16 bits).
* `int`, `uint` and `float` (32 bits).
* `long`, `ulong` and `double` (64 bits).
* `nint` and `unit` (32 or 64 bits, depending on the architecture)

A single `Vector128` operation allows you to operate on: 16 (s)bytes, 8 (u)shorts, 4 (u)ints/floats, or 2 (u)longs/double(s).

```
------------------------------128-bits---------------------------
|             64                |               64              |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
|      32       |      32       |      32       |      32       |
----------------------------------------------------------------|
|  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
| 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
```

`Vector256<T>` is twice as big as `Vector128<T>`, so when it is hardware accelerated, and the data is large enough, you should use it instead of `Vector128<T>`. To check the acceleration, use `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` and `Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated` properties.

> The size of the input also matters. It needs to be at least of the size of a single vector to be able to execute the vectorized code path. `Vector128<T>.Count` and `Vector256<T>.Count` return the size of a vector of given type in bytes.

Author: @Rob-Hague great catch!!

> Both APIs are turned into constants (no method call is required to retrieve the information) by the Just-In-Time compiler. It's not true for pre-compiled code (NativeAOT).

Author: Good point! Would following suggestion make it more clear?

```suggestion
Both APIs are turned into constants (no method call is required to retrieve the information) by the Just-In-Time compiler. In case of pre-compiled code (NativeAOT) it's not true for `IsHardwareAccelerated` property, as the required information is not available at compile time.
```

```cs
else if (Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<byte>.Count)
{
    // Vector128 code path
}
```

### Testing

Such a code structure requires us to **test all possible code paths**:

* `Vector256` is accelerated:
  * The input is large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector256`.
  * The input is not large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector256`, but it can benefit from vectorization with `Vector128` (when `Vector256` is accelerated then `Vector128` and smaller vectors are also).
  * The input is too small to benefit from any kind of vectorization.
* `Vector128` is accelerated
  * The input is large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector128`.
  * The input is too small to benefit from any kind of vectorization.
* Neither `Vector128` or  `Vector256` are accelerated.

It's possible to implement tests that cover some of the scenarios based on the size, but it's impossible to toggle hardware acceleration from unit test level. It can be controlled with environment variables before .NET process is started:

* When `DOTNET_EnableAVX2` is set to `0`, `Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated` returns `false`.

> * When `DOTNET_EnableAVX` is set to `0`, `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` returns `false`.

Reviewer 5: A typo? EnableAVX=0 should not affect `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated`

Author: @EgorBo great catch! I was a bug, I was convinced that it was true ;)

> * When `DOTNET_EnableAVX` is set to `0`, `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` returns `false`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

* When `DOTNET_EnableHWIntrinsic` is set to `0`, not only both mentioned APIs return `false`, but also `Vector64.IsHardwareAccelerated` and `Vector.IsHardwareAccelerated`.

Assuming that we run the tests on an `x64` machine that supports `Vector256` we need to write tests that cover all size scenarios and run them with:
* no custom settings
* `DOTNET_EnableAVX2=0`

> * `DOTNET_EnableAVX=0` (it can be skipped if `Vector64<T>` and `Vector<T>` are not involved)

Author: ```suggestion
```

    if (Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated)
    {
        config = config
            .AddJob(enough.WithId("Vector256"))
            .AddJob(enough.WithEnvironmentVariable("DOTNET_EnableAVX2", "0").WithId("Vector128"));

    }
    else if (Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated)
    {
        config = config.AddJob(enough.WithId("Vector128"));
    }

    BenchmarkSwitcher.FromAssembly(typeof(Program).Assembly)
        .Run(args, config);
}
```

**Note:** the config defines a [disassembler](https://adamsitnik.com/Disassembly-Diagnoser/), which exports a disassembly in GitHub markdown format (supported on both x64 and arm64, Windows and Linux). It is very often an invaluable tool when working with high-performance code where inspecting generated assembly code is required.

#### Memory alignment

BenchmarkDotNet does a lot of heavy lifting for the end users, but it can not protect us from the random memory alignment which can be different per each benchmark run and affect the stability of the benchmarks.

We have three possibilities:

* We can enforce the alignment ourselves and have very stable results.

> * We can ask the harness to try to randomize the memory and observe entire possible distribution with each run.

Reviewer 6: This is better grammar but unsure on the meaning
```suggestion
* We can ask the harness to try to randomize the memory and observe the entire possible distribution with each run.
```

* We can do nothing and wonder why the results vary from time to time.

##### Enforcing memory alignment

We can allocate aligned unmanaged memory by using the [NativeMemory.AlignedAlloc](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.nativememory.alignedalloc).

```cs
public unsafe class Benchmarks
{
    private void* _pointer;

    [Params(6, 32, 1024)] // test various sizes
    public uint Size;

    [GlobalSetup]
    public void Setup()
    {
        _pointer = NativeMemory.AlignedAlloc(byteCount: Size * sizeof(int), alignment: 32);

>         new Span<int>(_pointer, (int)Size).Fill(0); // ensure it's all zeros, so 1 is never found

Author: Perhaps `NativeMemory.Clear` would be the best choice?

```suggestion
        NativeMemory.Clear(_pointer, byteCount: Size * sizeof(int)); // ensure it's all zeros, so 1 is never found
```

Reviewer 3: Yes it is.
(I wasn't aware of that method, so thanks!)

Reviewer 5: Filed https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/84126, I hoped there would not be any difference 🙂

    }

    [Benchmark]
    public bool Contains()
    {
        ReadOnlySpan<int> buffer = new (_pointer, (int)Size);
        return buffer.Contains(1);
    }

    [GlobalCleanup]
    public void Cleanup() => NativeMemory.AlignedFree(_pointer);
}
```

Sample results (please mind the AVX2, AVX and SSE4.2 information printed in the summary):

```ini
BenchmarkDotNet=v0.13.5, OS=Windows 11 (10.0.22621.1413/22H2/2022Update/SunValley2)
AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 3945WX 12-Cores, 1 CPU, 24 logical and 12 physical cores
.NET SDK=8.0.100-alpha.1.22558.1
  [Host]    : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT AVX2
  Scalar    : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT
  Vector128 : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT AVX
  Vector256 : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT AVX2
```

```
|   Method |       Job | Size |       Mean |    StdDev | Ratio | Code Size |
|--------- |---------- |----- |-----------:|----------:|------:|----------:|
| Contains |    Scalar | 1024 | 143.844 ns | 0.6234 ns |  1.00 |     206 B |
| Contains | Vector128 | 1024 | 104.544 ns | 1.2792 ns |  0.73 |     335 B |
| Contains | Vector256 | 1024 |  55.769 ns | 0.6720 ns |  0.39 |     391 B |
```

> The results should be very stable (flat distributions), but on the other hand we are measuring the performance of best case scenario (the input is large and it's entire content is searched for, as the value is never found).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The results should be very stable (flat distributions), but on the other hand we are measuring the performance of the best case scenario (the input is large and its entire contents is searched through, as the value is never found).
```

Author: @Rob-Hague are you sure that `is` should still be used here?:

```diff
- its entire contents is searched through
+ its entire contents are searched through
```

?

Explaining benchmark design guidelines is outside of the scope of this document, but we have a [dedicated document](https://github.com/dotnet/performance/blob/main/docs/microbenchmark-design-guidelines.md#benchmarks-are-not-unit-tests) about it. To make a long story short, **you should benchmark all scenarios that are realistic for your production environment**, so your customers can actually benefit from your improvements.

##### Memory randomization

The alternative is to enable memory randomization. Before every iteration, the harness is going to allocate random-size objects, keep them alive and re-run the setup that should allocate the actual memory.

> You can read more about it [here](https://github.com/dotnet/BenchmarkDotNet/pull/1587), it requires understanding of what distribution is and how to read it. It's also out of scope of this document, but [Pro .NET Benchmarking](https://aakinshin.net/prodotnetbenchmarking/) book has two chapters dedicated to statistics and can help you get a very good understanding of this subject.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You can read more about it [here](https://github.com/dotnet/BenchmarkDotNet/pull/1587). It requires an understanding of what distribution is and how to read it. It's also out of scope of this document, but [Pro .NET Benchmarking](https://aakinshin.net/prodotnetbenchmarking/) has two chapters dedicated to statistics and can help you get a very good understanding of the subject.
```

No matter how you are going to benchmark your code, you need to keep in mind that **the larger the input, the more you can benefit from vectorization**. If your code uses small buffers, you might not benefit from it, or even regress the performance.

## Loops

> To work with inputs that are bigger than a single vector, we typically need to loop over the entire input. This should be split into two parts:

Reviewer 7: Yes, that's true that "you" is preferred over "we". However since this doesn't seem to be official MS documentation, it probably doesn't matter too much here. Either way, the guidance is here: https://styleguides.azurewebsites.net/Styleguide/Read?id=2700&topicid=25524

> To work with inputs that are bigger than a single vector, we typically need to loop over the entire input. This should be split into two parts:

Author: @gewarren thanks for sharing the link, I definitely want to follow the guidance

    while (elementOffset < (nuint)buffer.Length)
    {
        result += buffer[(int)elementOffset];
        elementOffset++;
    }

    return result;
}
```

**Note:** Use `ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(span)` instead of `ref span[0]` and `ref MemoryMarshal.GetArrayDataReference(array)` instead of `ref array[0]` to handle empty buffer scenarios (which would throw `IndexOutOfRangeException`). If the buffer is empty, these methods return a reference to the location where the 0th element would have been stored. Such a reference may or may not be null. You can use it for pinning but you must never dereference it.

**Note:** The `GetReference` method has an overload that accepts a `ReadOnlySpan` and returns mutable reference. Please use it with caution!

**Note:** Please keep in mind that `Vector128.Sum` is a static method. `Vectior128<T>` and `Vector256<T>` provide both instance and static methods (operators like `+` are just static methods in C#). `Vector128` and `Vector256` are non-generic static classes with static methods only. It's important to know about their existence when searching for methods.

### Vectorized remainder handling

> Now imagine that we need to check whether the given buffer contains specific number. In this case, processing some values more than once is acceptable, we don't need to handle the remainder in a non-vectorized fashion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now imagine that we need to check whether the given buffer contains specific number. In this case, processing some values more than once is acceptable, we don't need to handle the remainder in a non-vectorized fashion. This can be done for all idempotent operations (e.g. also copying).
```
To make this a bit more general?

> Example: a buffer contains six 32-bit integers, `Vector128` is accelerated, and it can work with four integers at a time. In the first loop iteration, we handle the first four elements. In the second (and last) iteration, we need to handle the remaining two, but it's less than `Vector128` size, so we handle last four elements. Which means that two values in the middle get checked twice.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Example: a buffer contains six 32-bit integers, `Vector128` is accelerated, and it can work with four integers at a time. In the first loop iteration, we handle the first four elements. In the second (and last) iteration we need to handle the remaining two elements. Since the remainder is smaller than one `Vector128` and we are not mutating the input, we perform a vectorized operation on a `Vector128` containing the last four elements.
```

{
    Debug.Assert(Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<int>.Count);

    Vector128<int> loaded;
    // We need a vector for storing the searched value.
    Vector128<int> values = Vector128.Create(searched);

    ref int searchSpace = ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(buffer);
    nuint oneVectorAwayFromEnd = (nuint)(buffer.Length - Vector128<int>.Count);
    for (nuint elementOffset = 0; elementOffset <= oneVectorAwayFromEnd; elementOffset += (nuint)Vector128<int>.Count)
    {
        loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, elementOffset);
        // compare the loaded vector with searched value vector
        if (Vector128.Equals(loaded, values) != Vector128<int>.Zero)
        {
            return true; // return true if a difference was found
        }
    }

    // If any elements remain, process the last vector in the search space.
    if (buffer.Length % Vector128<int>.Count != 0)
    {
        loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, oneVectorAwayFromEnd);
        if (Vector128.Equals(loaded, values) != Vector128<int>.Zero)
        {
            return true;
        }
    }

    return false;
}
```

> `Vector128.Create(value)` creates a new vector with all elements initialized to the specified value. So `Vector128<int>.Zero` is an equivalent of `Vector128.Create(0)`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`Vector128.Create(value)` creates a new vector with all elements initialized to the specified value. So `Vector128<int>.Zero` is equivalent to `Vector128.Create(0)`.
```

Writing tests that detect such issues is hard, but not impossible. .NET Team uses a helper utility called [BoundedMemory](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/Common/tests/TestUtilities/System/Buffers/BoundedMemory.Creation.cs) that allocates memory region which is immediately preceded by or immediately followed by a poison (`MEM_NOACCESS`) page. Attempting to read the memory immediately before or after it results in `AccessViolationException`.

## Loading and storing vectors

### Loading

Both `Vector128` and `Vector256` provide at least five ways of loading them from memory:

```cs
public static class Vector128
{
    public static Vector128<T> Load<T>(T* source) where T : unmanaged;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadAligned<T>(T* source) where T : unmanaged;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadAlignedNonTemporal<T>(T* source) where T : unmanaged;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadUnsafe<T>(ref T source) where T : struct;
    public static Vector128<T> LoadUnsafe<T>(ref T source, nuint elementOffset) where T : struct;
}
```

> The first three overloads require a pointer to the source. To be able to use a pointer in a safe way, the buffer needs to be pinned first (the GC is not tracking unmanaged pointers, we have to ensure that the memory does not get moved by GC in the meantime, as the pointers would silently become invalid). That is simple, the problem is doing the pointer arithmetic right:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The first three overloads require a pointer to the source. To be able to use a pointer in a safe way, the buffer needs to be pinned first. This is because the GC cannot track unmanaged pointers. It needs help to ensure that it doesn't move the memory while you're using it, as the pointers would silently become invalid. The tricky part here is doing the pointer arithmetic right:
```

```cs
unsafe int UnmanagedPointersSum(Span<int> buffer)
{
    fixed (int* pBuffer = buffer)
    {
        int* pEnd = pBuffer + buffer.Length;
        int* pOneVectorFromEnd = pEnd - Vector128<int>.Count;
        int* pCurrent = pBuffer;

        Vector128<int> sum = Vector128<int>.Zero;

        while (pCurrent <= pOneVectorFromEnd)
        {
            sum += Vector128.Load(pCurrent);

            pCurrent += Vector128<int>.Count;
        }

        int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

        while (pCurrent < pEnd)
        {
            result += *pCurrent;

            pCurrent++;
        }

        return result;
    }
}
```

> The `LoadAligned` and `LoadAlignedNonTemporal` require the input to be aligned. Aligned reads and writes should be slightly faster but using them comes at a price of increased complexity.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`LoadAligned` and `LoadAlignedNonTemporal` require the input to be aligned. Aligned reads and writes should be slightly faster but using them comes at a price of increased complexity.
```

ASCII characters are values in the range from `0` to `127` (inclusive). It means that we can find invalid ASCII bytes by just searching for values that are larger than `127`. If we treat `byte` (unsigned, range from 0 to 255) as `sbyte` (signed, range from -128 to 127), it's a matter of performing "is less than zero" check.

The binary representation of 0-127 range is following:

```log
00000000
01111111
^
most significant bit
```

When we look at it, we can realize that another way is checking whether the most significant bit is equal `1`. For the scalar version, we could perform a logical AND:

```cs
bool IsValidAscii(byte c) => (c & 0b1000_0000) == 0;
```

### Vectorized solution

Another step is vectorizing our scalar solution and choosing the best way of doing that based on data.

If we reuse one of the loops presented in the previous sections, all we need to implement is a method that accepts `Vector128<byte>` and returns `bool` and does exactly the same thing that our scalar method did, but for a vector rather than single value:

```cs
[MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.AggressiveInlining)]

> bool VectorContainsNonAsciiChar(Vector128<byte> asciiVector)

Author: The point I wanted to make here is how easy it easy to map a scalar operation to vector operation.

Few paragraphs below I've posted more optimal solutions: `TestZ` and `MaxPairwise`, both currently used by the runtime. Do you mean that you can offer something faster than these two?

```ini
BenchmarkDotNet=v0.13.5, OS=Windows 11 (10.0.22621.1413/22H2/2022Update/SunValley2)
AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 3945WX 12-Cores, 1 CPU, 24 logical and 12 physical cores
.NET SDK=8.0.100-alpha.1.22558.1
  [Host]   : .NET 7.0.4 (7.0.423.11508), X64 RyuJIT AVX2
```

```
|                     Method | Size |      Mean | Ratio | Code Size |
|--------------------------- |----- |----------:|------:|----------:|
|                     Scalar | 1024 | 252.13 ns |  1.00 |      69 B |
|             GreaterThanAny | 1024 |  32.49 ns |  0.13 |     178 B |
|                LessThanAny | 1024 |  29.33 ns |  0.12 |     146 B |
|                        And | 1024 |  26.13 ns |  0.10 |     138 B |
|                      TestZ | 1024 |  27.26 ns |  0.11 |     129 B |
| ExtractMostSignificantBits | 1024 |  27.33 ns |  0.11 |     141 B |
```

Even such a simple problem can be solved in at least 5 different ways. Using sophisticated hardware-specific instructions does not always provide the best performance, so **with the new `Vector128` and `Vector256` APIs we don't need to become assembly language experts to write fast, vectorized code**.

## Toolchain

> `Vector128`, `Vector128<T>`, `Vector256` and `Vector256<T>` expose a LOT of APIs. We are constrained by time, so we won't describe all of them with examples. Instead, we have grouped them into categories to give you an overview of their capabilities. It's not required to remember what  each of these methods is doing, it's important to remember what kind of operations they allow for and check the details when needed.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`Vector128`, `Vector128<T>`, `Vector256` and `Vector256<T>` expose a LOT of APIs. We are constrained by time, so we won't describe all of them with examples. Instead, we have grouped them into categories to give you an overview of their capabilities. It's not required to remember what each of these methods is doing, but it's important to remember what kind of operations they allow for and check the details when needed.
```

### Creation

Each of the vector types provides a `Create` method that accepts a single value and returns a vector with all elements initialized to this value.

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Create<T>(T value) where T : struct;
```

`CreateScalar` initializes first element to the specified value, and the remaining elements to zero.

```cs
public static Vector128<int> CreateScalar(int value);
```

`CreateScalarUnsafe` is similar, but the remaining elements are left uninitialized. It's dangerous!

We also have an overload that allows for specifying every value in given vector:

```cs
public static Vector128<short> Create(short e0, short e1, short e2, short e3, short e4, short e5, short e6, short e7)
```

> And last, but not least a `Create` overload that accepts a buffer. It creates a vector with its elements set to the first `VectorXYZ<T>.Count`-many elements of the buffer. It's not recommended to use it in a loop, where `Load` methods should be used instead (performance).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
And last but not least we have a `Create` overload which accepts a buffer. It creates a vector with its elements set to the first `VectorXYZ<T>.Count` elements of the buffer. It's not recommended to use it in a loop, where `Load` methods should be used instead (for performance).
```

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Create<T>(ReadOnlySpan<T> values) where T : struct
```

to perform a copy in the other direction, we can use one of the `CopyTo` extension methods:

```cs
public static void CopyTo<T>(this Vector128<T> vector, Span<T> destination) where T : struct
```

### Bit operations

All size-specific vector types provide a set of APIs for common bit operations.

`BitwiseAnd` computes the bitwise-and of two vectors, `BitwiseOr` computes the bitwise-or of two vectors. They can both be expressed by using the corresponding operators (`&` and `|`). The same goes for `Xor` which can be expressed with `^` operator and `Negate` (`~`).

```cs
public static Vector128<T> BitwiseAnd<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct => left & right;
public static Vector128<T> BitwiseOr<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct => left | right;
public static Vector128<T> Xor<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left ^ right;
public static Vector128<T> Negate<T>(Vector128<T> vector) => ~vector;
```

> `AndNot` computes the bitwise-and of a given vector and the ones complement of another vector.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`AndNot` computes the bitwise-and of a given vector and the ones' complement of another vector.
```

Author: @Rob-Hague could you please explain what is the goal of adding `'` after "ones"?

Reviewer 6: That's a mega-nit. It's about possession of the plural (in fact, the same thing is written in the second sentence of https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ones%27_complement 🙂)

```cs
public static Vector128<T> AndNot<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left & ~right;
```

`ShiftLeft` shifts each element of a vector left by the specified number of bits.
`ShiftRightArithmetic` performs a **signed** shift right and `ShiftRightLogical` performs an **unsigned** shift:

```cs
public static Vector128<sbyte> ShiftLeft(Vector128<sbyte> vector, int shiftCount);
public static Vector128<sbyte> ShiftRightArithmetic(Vector128<sbyte> vector, int shiftCount);
public static Vector128<byte> ShiftRightLogical(Vector128<byte> vector, int shiftCount);
```

### Equality

`EqualsAll` compares two vectors to determine if all elements are equal. `EqualsAny` compares two vectors to determine if any elements are equal.

```cs
public static bool EqualsAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct => left == right;
public static bool EqualsAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

> `Equals` compares two vectors to determine if they are equal on a per-element basis. It returns a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on if the corresponding elements in `left` and `right` arguments were equal.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`Equals` compares two vectors to determine if they are equal on a per-element basis. It returns a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on whether the corresponding elements in the `left` and `right` arguments were equal.
```

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Equals<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

> How to calculate the index of first match? Let's take a closer look at the result of following equality check:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
How do we calculate the index of the first match? Let's take a closer look at the result of following equality check:
```

```cs
Vector128<int> left = Vector128.Create(1, 2, 3, 4);
Vector128<int> right = Vector128.Create(0, 0, 3, 0);
Vector128<int> equals = Vector128.Equals(left, right);
Console.WriteLine(equals);
```

```log
<0, 0, -1, 0>
```

`-1` is just `0xFFFFFFFF` (all-bits-set). We could use `GetElement` to get the first non-zero element.

```cs
public static T GetElement<T>(this Vector128<T> vector, int index) where T : struct
```

> But it would not be an optimal solution. We should rather extract the most significant bits:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
But it would not be an optimal solution. We should instead extract the most significant bits:
```

```cs
uint mostSignificantBits = equals.ExtractMostSignificantBits();
Console.WriteLine(Convert.ToString(mostSignificantBits, 2).PadLeft(32, '0'));
```

```log
00000000000000000000000000000100
```

> and use [BitOperations.TrailingZeroCount](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.numerics.bitoperations.trailingzerocount) to get trailing zero count.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
and use [BitOperations.TrailingZeroCount](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.numerics.bitoperations.trailingzerocount) to get the trailing zero count.
```

> To calculate the last index, we should use [BitOperations.LeadingZeroCount](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.numerics.bitoperations.leadingzerocount). But the returned value needs to be subtracted from 31 (32 bits in an `unit`, and indexed from 0).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To calculate the last index, we should use [BitOperations.LeadingZeroCount](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.numerics.bitoperations.leadingzerocount). But the returned value needs to be subtracted from 31 (32 bits in an `unit`, indexed from 0).
```

> If we were working with a buffer loaded from memory (example: searching for the last index of given character in a buffer) both results would be relative to the `elementOffset` provided to the `Load` method that was used to load the vector from the buffer.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If we were working with a buffer loaded from memory (example: searching for the last index of a given character in the buffer) both results would be relative to the `elementOffset` provided to the `Load` method that was used to load the vector from the buffer.
```

```cs
int ComputeLastIndex<T>(nint elementOffset, Vector128<T> equals) where T : struct
{
    uint mostSignificantBits = equals.ExtractMostSignificantBits();

    int index = 31 - BitOperations.LeadingZeroCount(mostSignificantBits); // 31 = 32 (bits in UInt32) - 1 (indexing from zero)

    return (int)elementOffset + index;
}
```

If we were using the `Load` overload that takes only the managed reference, we could use [Unsafe.ByteOffset<T>(ref T, ref T)](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.compilerservices.unsafe.byteoffset) to calculate the element offset.

```cs

> unsafe int ComputeFirstIndex<T>(ref T searchSpace, ref T current, Vector128<T> equals) where T : struct

Reviewer 8: Doesn't need ```unsafe```

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6011991/229124628-046a73f0-e6a9-4b71-93b2-80d571cba2ce.png)

{
    int elementOffset = (int)Unsafe.ByteOffset(ref searchSpace, ref current) / sizeof(T);

    uint mostSignificantBits = equals.ExtractMostSignificantBits();
    int index = BitOperations.TrailingZeroCount(mostSignificantBits);
    
    return elementOffset + index;
}
```

### Comparison

> Beside equality checks, vector APIs allow for comparison. The `bool` returning overload return `true` when given condition is true:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Beside equality checks, vector APIs allow for comparison. The `bool`-returning overloads return `true` when the given condition is true:
```

```cs
public static bool GreaterThanAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool GreaterThanAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool GreaterThanOrEqualAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool GreaterThanOrEqualAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanOrEqualAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanOrEqualAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

> Similarly to `Equals`, vector-returning overloads return a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on if the corresponding elements in `left` and `right` meet given condition.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Similarly to `Equals`, vector-returning overloads return a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on whether the corresponding elements in `left` and `right` meet the given condition.
```

public static Vector128<T> Divide<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left / right;
public static Vector128<T> Divide<T>(Vector128<T> left, T right) => left / right;
public static Vector128<T> Multiply<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left * right;
public static Vector128<T> Multiply<T>(Vector128<T> left, T right) => left * right;
public static Vector128<T> Subtract<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left - right;
```

**Note:** Some of the methods accept a single value as the second argument.

`Abs`, `Ceiling`, `Floor`, `Max`, `Min`, `Sqrt` and `Sum` are also provided:

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Abs<T>(Vector128<T> vector) where T : struct
public static Vector128<double> Ceiling(Vector128<double> vector)
public static Vector128<float> Floor(Vector128<float> vector)
public static Vector128<T> Max<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right)
public static Vector128<T> Min<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right)
public static Vector128<T> Sqrt<T>(Vector128<T> vector);
public static T Sum<T>(Vector128<T> vector) where T : struct
```

### Conversion

> Vector types provide a set of methods dedicated to numbers conversion:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Vector types provide a set of methods dedicated to number conversions:
```

```cs
public static unsafe Vector128<double> ConvertToDouble(Vector128<long> vector)
public static unsafe Vector128<double> ConvertToDouble(Vector128<ulong> vector)
public static unsafe Vector128<int> ConvertToInt32(Vector128<float> vector)
public static unsafe Vector128<long> ConvertToInt64(Vector128<double> vector)
public static unsafe Vector128<float> ConvertToSingle(Vector128<int> vector)
public static unsafe Vector128<float> ConvertToSingle(Vector128<uint> vector)
public static unsafe Vector128<uint> ConvertToUInt32(Vector128<float> vector)

> public static unsafe Vector128<ulong> ConvertToUInt64(Vector128<double> vector)

Reviewer 8: Same here, don't need ```unsafe```

public static unsafe Vector128<uint> Narrow(Vector128<ulong> lower, Vector128<ulong> upper)
```

In contrary to [Sse2.PackUnsignedSaturate](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.intrinsics.x86.sse2.packunsignedsaturate) and [AdvSimd.Arm64.UnzipEven](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.intrinsics.arm.advsimd.arm64.unzipeven), `Narrow` applies a mask via AND to cut anything above the max value of returned vector:

```cs
Vector256<ushort> ushortVector = Vector256.Create((ushort)300);
Console.WriteLine(ushortVector);
unchecked { Console.WriteLine((byte)300); }
Console.WriteLine(300 & byte.MaxValue);
Console.WriteLine(Vector128.Narrow(ushortVector.GetLower(), ushortVector.GetUpper()));

if (Sse2.IsSupported)
{
    Console.WriteLine(Sse2.PackUnsignedSaturate(ushortVector.GetLower().AsInt16(), ushortVector.GetUpper().AsInt16()));
}
```

```log
<300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300, 300>
44
44
<44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44>
<255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255>
```

### Shuffle

> `Shuffle` creates a new vector by selecting values from an input vector using a set of indices (values that represent indexes if the input vector).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`Shuffle` creates a new vector by selecting values from an input vector using a set of indices (values that represent indexes of the input vector).
```

- If you are already an expert and you have vectorized your code for both `x64/x86` and `arm64/arm` code you can use the new APIs to simplify your code, but you most likely won't observe any performance gains. [#64451](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/64451) lists the places where it was/can be done in dotnet/runtime. You can use links to the merged PRs to see real-life examples.
- If you have already vectorized your code, but only for `x64/x86` or `arm64/arm`, you can use the  new APIs to have a single, cross-platform implementation.
- If you have already vectorized your code with `Vector<T>` you can use the new APIs to check if they can produce better codegen.
- If you are not familiar with hardware specific instructions or you are about to vectorize a scalar algorithm, you should start with the new `Vector128` and `Vector256` APIs. Get a solid and working implementation and eventually consider using hardware-specific methods for performance critical code paths.

### Best practices

> 1. Implement tests that cover all code paths, including Acces Violations.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. Implement tests that cover all code paths, including Access Violations.
```

```
------------------------------128-bits---------------------------
|             64                |               64              |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
|      32       |      32       |      32       |      32       |
----------------------------------------------------------------|
|  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
| 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
```

`Vector256<T>` is twice as big as `Vector128<T>`, so when it is hardware accelerated, we should prefer it over a `Vector128<T>`. To check the acceleration, we need to use `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` and `Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated` properties.

We also must account for the size of the input. It needs to be at least of the size of a single vector to be able to execute the vectorized code path. `Vector128<T>.Count` and `Vector128<T>.Count` return the size of a vector of given type in bytes.

> Both APIs are turned into constants (no method call is required to retrieve the information) by the Just-In-Time compiler. It's not true for pre-compiled code (NativeAOT).

Reviewer 5: I think it is expected to be emitted as constant for any AOT (R2R, NAOT, Mono-LLVM). It is `IsSupported` that has some edge-cases where it can be emitted as a runtime-check

No matter how you are going to benchmark your code, you need to keep in mind that **the larger the input, the more you can benefit from vectorization**. If your code uses small buffers, you might not benefit from it, or even regress the performance.

## Loops

To work with inputs that are bigger than a single vector, we typically need to loop over the entire input. This should be split into two parts:

* vectorized loop that operates on multiple values at a time
* handling of the remainder

Example: our input is a buffer of ten integers, assuming that `Vector128` is accelerated, we handle the first four values in the first loop iteration, the next four in the second iteration and then we stop, as only two are left. Depending on how we can handle the remainder, we distinguish two approaches.

### Scalar remainder handling

> Imagine that we want to calculate the sum of all the numbers in given buffer. We definitely want to add every element just once, without repetitions. That is why in the first loop, we add four (128/32) integers in one iteration. In the second loop, we handle the remaining values.

Author: Did you mean `32 bits`?

> Imagine that we want to calculate the sum of all the numbers in given buffer. We definitely want to add every element just once, without repetitions. That is why in the first loop, we add four (128/32) integers in one iteration. In the second loop, we handle the remaining values.

Reviewer 3: Yes (bad typo here).
The point is just to make it more obvious where the 128 and 32 comes from.

```cs
unsafe int UnmanagedPointersSum(Span<int> buffer)
{
    fixed (int* pBuffer = buffer)
    {
        int* pEnd = pBuffer + buffer.Length;
        int* pOneVectorFromEnd = pEnd - Vector128<int>.Count;
        int* pCurrent = pBuffer;

        Vector128<int> sum = Vector128<int>.Zero;

        while (pCurrent <= pOneVectorFromEnd)
        {
            sum += Vector128.Load(pCurrent);

            pCurrent += Vector128<int>.Count;
        }

        int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

        while (pCurrent < pEnd)
        {
            result += *pCurrent;

            pCurrent++;
        }

        return result;
    }
}
```

The `LoadAligned` and `LoadAlignedNonTemporal` require the input to be aligned. Aligned reads and writes should be slightly faster but using them comes at a price of increased complexity.

Currently .NET exposes only one API fo allocating unmanaged aligned memory: [NativeMemory.AlignedAlloc](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.nativememory.alignedalloc). In the future, we might provide [a dedicated API](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/27146) for allocating managed, aligned and hence pinned memory buffers.

> The alternative to creating aligned buffers (we don't always have the control over input) is to pin the buffer, find first aligned address, handle non-aligned elements, then start aligned loop and afterwards handle the remainder. Adding such complexity to our code is hardly ever worth it and needs to be proved with proper benchmarking on various hardware.

Reviewer 3: > hardly ever worth it and needs to be proved

👍🏻

Reviewer: We likely shouldn't have this wording at all.

Ensuring you process only aligned data may not be impactful to small amounts of data, but for medium to large data it can provide significant perf benefits as well as improving overall run to run stability and reducing noise.

All processors have some form of penalty for performing a read or write that splits a cache line or page boundary. The cost of this depends on the processor and the size/frequency of the split. Every architecture optimization manual goes into this extensively and explicitly recommends avoiding splits if possible.

As a summary, most modern processors have 64-byte cache lines and roughly 4kb pages. Split stores are almost universally more expensive than split loads. On older processors, the cost of a split page load was around 100 cycles and the cost of a split page store around 150 cycles. On more modern processors this is down to around 5 cycles for a split load (I don't recall the cost of a split page store). Likewise split cache lines loads use to cost around 20 cycles, that was reduced to 5 a few years back, and in the most recent down to a 1-2 cycle penalty.

These penalties can still add up and are much more prominent with wider vector sizes. For example, with `Vector128<T>` you'll (for misaligned data) hit a cache split every 4 operations and a page split every 256 operations, your `Vector256<T>` you'll hit a cache split every 2 operations and a page split every 128 operations, with `Vector512<T>` this again increases to a cache split every operation and a page split every 64 operations.

So for `Vector256<T>` you get 2x the cache split rate, and 4x for `Vector512<T>`. While some of this cost is mitigated by fewer instructions, you're still adding a non-trivial penalty to what is often one of the bigger (if not biggest) bottlenecks in many vectorized algorithms.

    ref ushort utf16Buffer = ref *(ushort*)pUtf16Buffer;
}
```

We should avoid doing this in the opposite direction, as most engineers will assume that unmanaged pointers are already pinned.

## Mindset

Vectorizing real-world algorithms seems complex at the beginning. And what do software engineers do with complex problems? We break them down into sub-problems until these become simple enough to be solved directly.

Let's implement a vectorized method for checking whether a given byte buffer consists only from valid ASCII characters to see how similar problems can be solved.

### Edge cases

Before we start working on the implementation, let's list all edge cases for our `IsAcii(ReadOnlySpan<byte> buffer)` method (and ideally write tests):

* It does not need to throw any argument exceptions, as `ReadOnlySpan` is `struct` and it can never be `null` or invalid.
* It should return `true` for an empty buffer.
* It should detect invalid characters in the entire buffer, including the remainder.
* It should not read any bytes that don't belong to the provided buffer.

### Scalar solution

Once we know all edge cases, we need to understand our problem and find a scalar solution.

> ASCII characters are values in the range from `0` to `127` (inclusive). It means that we can find invalid ASCII bytes by just searching for values that are larger than `127`. If we treat `byte` (unsigned) as `sbyte` (signed), it's a matter of performing "is less than zero" check.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ASCII characters are values in the range from `0` to `127` (inclusive). It means that we can find invalid ASCII bytes by just searching for values that are larger than `127`. If we treat `byte` (unsigned, range from 0 to 255) as `sbyte` (signed, range from -128 to 127), it's a matter of performing "is less than zero" check.
```
Too verbose?
But it makes it obvious why the cast from `byte -> sbyte` is handy here.

public static Vector128<byte> ShiftRightLogical(Vector128<byte> vector, int shiftCount);
```

### Equality

`EqualsAll` compares two vectors to determine if all elements are equal. `EqualsAny` compares two vectors to determine if any elements are equal.

```cs
public static bool EqualsAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct => left == right;
public static bool EqualsAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

`Equals` compares two vectors to determine if they are equal on a per-element basis. It returns a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on if the corresponding elements in `left` and `right` arguments were equal.

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Equals<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

How to calculate the index of first match? Let's take a closer look at the result of following equality check:

```cs
Vector128<int> left = Vector128.Create(1, 2, 3, 4);
Vector128<int> right = Vector128.Create(0, 0, 3, 0);
Vector128<int> equals = Vector128.Equals(left, right);
Console.WriteLine(equals);
```

```log
<0, 0, -1, 0>
```

> `-1` is just `FFFFFFFF` (all-bits-set). We could use `GetElement` to get the first non-zero element.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`-1` is just `0xFFFFFFFF` (all-bits-set). We could use `GetElement` to get the first non-zero element.
```

44
44
<44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44, 44>
<255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255, 255>
```

### Shuffle

`Shuffle` creates a new vector by selecting values from an input vector using a set of indices (values that represent indexes if the input vector).

```cs
public static Vector128<int> Shuffle(Vector128<int> vector, Vector128<int> indices)
public static Vector128<uint> Shuffle(Vector128<uint> vector, Vector128<uint> indices)
public static Vector128<float> Shuffle(Vector128<float> vector, Vector128<int> indices)
public static Vector128<long> Shuffle(Vector128<long> vector, Vector128<long> indices)
public static Vector128<ulong> Shuffle(Vector128<ulong> vector, Vector128<ulong> indices)
public static Vector128<double> Shuffle(Vector128<double> vector, Vector128<long> indices)
```

It can be used for many things, including reversing the input:

```cs
Vector128<int> intVector = Vector128.Create(100, 200, 300, 400);
Console.WriteLine(intVector);
Console.WriteLine(Vector128.Shuffle(intVector, Vector128.Create(3, 2, 1, 0)));
```

```log
<100, 200, 300, 400>
<400, 300, 200, 100>
```

#### Vector256.Shuffle vs Avx2.Shuffle

> `Vector256.Shuffle` and `Avx2.Shuffle` are not identical.
> 
> `Avx2.Shuffle` is effectively `2x128-bit ops` and so if we do `Vector256.Shuffle(value, Vector256.Create(0L, 1L, 0L, 1L))` it is going to think we want `value[0], value[1], value[0], value[1]`. Where-as `Avx2.Shuffle` treats this as `value[0], value[1], value[2], value[3]`.
> 
> While `Vector256.Shuffle` treats it as a "single 256-bit vector" (rather than "2x128-bit vectors"). This was done for consistency and to better map to a cross-platform mentality where `AVX-512` and `SVE` all operate on "full width".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Vector256.Shuffle` and `Avx2.Shuffle` are not identical.

`Avx2.Shuffle` is effectively `2x128-bit ops` while `Vector256.Shuffle` treats it as a "single 256-bit vector" (rather than "2x128-bit vectors"). This was done for consistency and to better map to a cross-platform mentality where `AVX-512` and `SVE` all operate on "full width".
```
I would not write more here. Or give full examples with their logged output to show the difference.

- If you are already an expert and you have vectorized your code for both `x64/x86` and `arm64/arm` code you can use the new APIs to simplify your code, but you most likely won't observe any performance gains. [#64451](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/64451) lists the places where it was/can be done in dotnet/runtime. You can use links to the merged PRs to see real-life examples.
- If you have already vectorized your code, but only for `x64/x86` or `arm64/arm`, you can use the  new APIs to have a single, cross-platform implementation.
- If you have already vectorized your code with `Vector<T>` you can use the new APIs to check if they can produce better codegen.
- If you are not familiar with hardware specific instructions or you are about to vectorize a scalar algorithm, you should start with the new `Vector128` and `Vector256` APIs. Get a solid and working implementation and eventually consider using hardware-specific methods for performance critical code paths.

### Best practices

> 1. Implement tests that cover all code paths, including Acces Violation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Implement tests that cover all code paths, including Acces Violations.
```
? (I'm not a native speaker too).

> 2. Run tests for all hardware acceleration scenarios, use the existing env vars to do that.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Run tests for all hardware acceleration scenarios, use the existing environment variables to do that.
```

3. Implement benchmarks that mimic real life scenarios, do not increase the complexity of your code when it's not beneficial for your end users.
4. Prefer managed references over unsafe pointers to avoid pinning and safety issues.
5. Use `ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(span)` instead `ref span[0]` and `ref MemoryMarshal.GetArrayDataReference(array)` instead `ref array[0]` to handle empty buffers correctly.
6. Prefer `LoadUnsafe(ref T, nuint elementOffset)` and `StoreUnsafe(this Vector128<T> source, ref T destination, nuint elementOffset)` over other methods for loading and storing vectors as they avoid pinning and the need of doing pointer arithmetic. Be aware of unsigned integer overflow!
7. Always handle the vectorized loop remainder.
8. When storing values in memory, be aware of a potential buffer overlap.

> 9. When writing a vectorized algorithm, start with writing the tests for edge cases, then implement a scalar solution and afterwards try to express what the scalar code is doing with Vector128/256 APIs. Over time, you may gain enough experience to skip the scalar step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
9. When writing a vectorized algorithm, start with writing the tests for edge cases, then implement a scalar solution and afterwards try to express what the scalar code is doing with Vector128/256 APIs.
```
As this document is focused on beginners, they shouldn't be encouraged to skip the scalar step.
They can figure out that way by themself once they got experienced enough 😉.

Author: Let's wait for other reviewers to chime in, as I am not convinced yet.

Reviewer: I would say you should never skip the scalar step.

You should always start with a solid scalar baseline. This scalar implementation is ultimately required since not all platforms will support vectorization (and developers can turn off acceleration with an environment variable). It also provides a nice foundation to write your tests against, to benchmark against, and to validate correctness against.

The next logical step is to unroll the operation to do `Vector###<T>.Count` operations at a time. This step, even without vectorization can provide its own perf benefits as it can often take advantage of pipelining in the CPU. -- This is the only step, if any, that I would consider "skippable" and that just comes with practice/experience.

Then you squash those unrolled operations into a single `Vector###<T>` operation to end up with a vectorized implementation.

You can finally and optionally, do additional tweaks to improve the vectorized implementation such as handling alignment, more efficiently processing trailing elements, or doing additional unrolling of the vectorized code to take advantage of SIMD pipelining.

    + [Testing](#testing)
    + [Benchmarking](#benchmarking)
      - [Custom config](#custom-config)
      - [Memory alignment](#memory-alignment)
        * [Enforcing memory alignment](#enforcing-memory-alignment)
        * [Memory randomization](#memory-randomization)
  * [Loops](#loops)
    + [Scalar remainder handling](#scalar-remainder-handling)
    + [Vectorized remainder handling](#vectorized-remainder-handling)
    + [Access violation testing](#access-violation-av-testing)
  * [Loading and storing vectors](#loading-and-storing-vectors)
    + [Loading](#loading)
    + [Storing](#storing)
    + [Casting](#casting)
  * [Mindset](#mindset)
    + [Edge cases](#edge-cases)
    + [Scalar solution](#scalar-solution)
    + [Vectorized solution](#vectorized-solution)
  * [Toolchain](#toolchain)
    + [Creation](#creation)
    + [Bit operations](#bit-operations)
    + [Equality](#equality)
    + [Comparison](#comparison)
    + [Math](#math)
    + [Conversion](#conversion)
    + [Widening and Narrowing](#widening-and-narrowing)
    + [Shuffle](#shuffle)
  * [Summary](#summary)
    + [Best practices](#best-practices)

TL;DR: Go to [Summary](#summary)

> # Introduction to vectorization with Vector128 and Vector256

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
# Introduction to vectorization with Vector128 and Vector256
```
With `Vector64<T>`, `Vector128<T>`, `Vector256<T>`, and `Vector512<T>` getting introduced in this section, it would be helpful to also introduce `Vector`, `Vector<T>`, `Vector2`, `Vector3`, and `Vector4` and describe how their roles.

I recommend that @tannergooding adds that in as a follow-up PR though.

Reviewer: 👍. Notably `Vector2/3/4` are effectively specialized ones for graphics support and not for more general algorithms.

Vectorization is the art of converting an algorithm from operating on a single value per iteration to operating on a set of values (vector) per iteration. It can greatly improve performance at a cost of increased code complexity.

In recent releases, .NET has introduced many new APIs for vectorization. The vast majority of them are hardware specific, so they require users to provide an implementation per processor architecture (such as x86, x64, Arm64, WASM, or other platforms), with the option of using the most optimal instructions for hardware that is executing the code.

.NET 7 introduced a set of new APIs for `Vector64<T>`, `Vector128<T>` and `Vector256<T>` for writing hardware-agnostic, cross platform vectorized code. Similarly, .NET 8 introduced `Vector512<T>`. The purpose of this document is to introduce you to the new APIs and provide a set of best practices.

## Code structure

> `Vector128<T>` is the "common denominator" across all platforms that support vectorization (and this is expected to always be the case). It represents a 128-bit vector of type `T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Vector128<T>` is the "common denominator" across all platforms that support vectorization (and this is expected to always be the case). It represents a 128-bit vector containing elements of type `T`.
```

`T` is constrained to specific primitive types:

* `byte` and `sbyte` (8 bits).
* `short` and `ushort` (16 bits).
* `int`, `uint` and `float` (32 bits).
* `long`, `ulong` and `double` (64 bits).
* `nint` and `nuint` (32 or 64 bits, depending on the architecture, available in .NET 7+)

.NET 8 introduced a `Vector128<T>.IsSupported` that indicates whether a given `T` will throw to help identify what works per runtime, including from generic contexts.

A single `Vector128` operation allows you to operate on: 16 (s)bytes, 8 (u)shorts, 4 (u)ints/floats, or 2 (u)longs/double(s).

```
------------------------------128-bits---------------------------
|             64                |               64              |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
|      32       |      32       |      32       |      32       |
----------------------------------------------------------------|
|  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |  16   |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
| 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 | 8 |
-----------------------------------------------------------------
```

> `Vector256<T>` is twice as big as `Vector128<T>`, so when it is hardware accelerated, and the data is large enough and the benchmarks prove that it offers better performance, you should use it instead of `Vector128<T>`. Namely, `Vector256<T>` on x86/x64 is mostly treated as `2x Vector128<T>` and while there are some operations that can "cross lanes", they can sometimes be more expensive or have other hidden costs.

Reviewer: Consider expanding this with more detail. It may be worth putting this additional detail elsewhere and linking to it instead.
````suggestion
`Vector256<T>` is twice as big as `Vector128<T>`, so when it is hardware accelerated, the data is large enough, and the benchmarks prove that it offers better performance, you should consider using it instead of `Vector128<T>`. Benchmarking your code can be important as not all platforms treat larger vectors the same.

For example, `Vector256<T>` on x86/x64 is mostly treated as `2x Vector128<T>` rather than as `1x Vector256<T>`, where each `Vector128<T>` is considered a "lane".  For most operations, this doesn't present any additional considerationas they only operate on individual elements of the vector. However, some operations could "cross lanes" such as shuffling or pairwise operations and that may require additional overhead to handle.

As an example, consider `Add(Vector128<float> lhs, Vector128<float> rhs)` where you end up effectively doing (pseudo-code):
```csharp
result[0] = lhs[0] + rhs[0];
result[1] = lhs[1] + rhs[1];
result[2] = lhs[2] + rhs[2];
result[3] = lhs[3] + rhs[3];
```

With this algorihtm it doesn't matter what size vector we have as we're accessing the same index of the input vectors and only one at a time. So regardless of whether we have `Vector128<T>` or `Vector256<T>` or `Vector512<T>`, it all operates the same.

However, if you then consider `AddPairwise(Vector128<float> lhs, Vector128<float> rhs)` (sometimes called `HorizontalAdd`) where you instead end up effectively doing:
```csharp
// process left
result[0] = lhs[0] + lhs[1];
result[1] = lhs[2] + lhs[3];

// process right
result[2] = rhs[0] + rhs[1];
result[3] = rhs[2] + rhs[3];
```

You may notice that this algorithm would change behavior if expanded up to operate on a single 256-bit vector (note `result[2]` is now `lhs[4] + lhs[6]` and not `rhs[0] + rhs[1]`):
```csharp
// process left
result[0] = lhs[0] + lhs[1];
result[1] = lhs[2] + lhs[3];
result[2] = lhs[4] + lhs[5];
result[3] = lhs[6] + lhs[7];

// process right
result[4] = rhs[0] + rhs[1];
result[5] = rhs[2] + rhs[3];
result[6] = rhs[4] + rhs[5];
result[7] = rhs[6] + rhs[7];
```

Because this behavior would change, the x86/x64 platform opted to treat the operation as `2x Vector128<float>` inputs giving you instead:
```csharp
// process lower left
result[0] = lhs[0] + lhs[1];
result[1] = lhs[2] + lhs[3];

// process lower right
result[2] = rhs[0] + rhs[1];
result[3] = rhs[2] + rhs[3];

// process upper left
result[4] = lhs[4] + lhs[5];
result[5] = lhs[6] + lhs[7];

// process upper right
result[6] = rhs[4] + rhs[5];
result[7] = rhs[6] + rhs[7];
```

This ends up preserving behavior and making it much easier to transition from `128-bit` to `256-bit` or higher as you're effectively just unrolling the loop again. It does, however, mean that some algorithms may need additional handling if you need to truly do anything involving the upper and lower lanes together. The exact additional expense here depends on what is being done, what the underlying hardware supports, and several other factors covered in more detail later.
````

> To check the acceleration, use `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` and `Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated` properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check the acceleration, use `IsHardwareAccelerated` property on the relevant non-generic vector class. For example, `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` or `Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated`.
```

Reviewer: It may also be worth a note that some operations may still perform differently on different hardware. For example, floating-point division may be accelerated while integer division may not. There is currently no way to determine acceleration on a per method basis.

> The size of the input also matters. It needs to be at least of the size of a single vector to be able to execute the vectorized code path (there are some advanced tricks that can allow you to operate on smaller inputs, but we won't describe them here). `Vector128<T>.Count` and `Vector256<T>.Count` return the number of elements of the given type T in a single vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The size of the input also matters. It needs to be at least of the size of a single vector to be able to execute the vectorized code path (there are some advanced tricks that can allow you to operate on smaller inputs, but we won't describe them here). The `Count` property (for example `Vector128<T>.Count` or `Vector256<T>.Count`) return the number of elements of the given type T in a single vector.
```

I think it is good, in general, to describe the properties more abstractly and then give an example using `Vector128<T>` where possible. This helps cover that the property works the same way regardless of vector type (e.g. `Vector<T>`, `Vector64<T>`, `Vector128<T>`, `Vector256<T>`, or `Vector512<T>`) while still providing a concrete usage that users can refer to.

We should likely try to touch this up "everywhere" in the doc.

> Both `Count` and `IsHardwareAccelerated` are turned into constants by the Just-In-Time compiler (i.e. no method call is required to retrieve the information). In the case of pre-compiled code (NativeAOT), this is not true for the `IsHardwareAccelerated` property, as the required information is not available at compile time.

Reviewer: `IsHardwareAccelerated` should always be a constant. It's the `Isa.IsSupported` cases that may be dynamic checks (but the logic under which they are constant or dynamic can be quite complex to cover)

> **Note:** When `Vector256` is accelerated then `Vector128` and `Vector64` are also accelerated.

Reviewer: Today, when `Vector256` is accelerated than `Vector128` will also be; and we expect that will always be the case but isn't something we can strictly "guarantee".

Today, `Vector64` is not accelerated on x86/x64 (we could do some things here and make it work, but we don't today).

The reason I say we can't strictly guarantee it is there may be platforms where they only provide a variable sized vector and so they would only accelerate the largest size they provide.

Reviewer: In general, the best practice for `IsHardwareAccelerated` is to always test explicitly. You can rely on certain behaviors for specific platforms (such as if `Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated` on x86/x64, then `Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated` will definitely be true), but not all of them.

The case where users really can rely on this is for the `Isa.IsSupported` checks as we guarantee that if `DerivedIsa.IsSupported` then `BaseIsa.IsSupported` must also be true. The same goes for if `Isa.NestedIsa.IsSupported` is true then `Isa.IsSupported` must be true.

That is why the code is very often structured like this:

```cs
void CodeStructure(ReadOnlySpan<byte> buffer)
{
    if (Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector256<byte>.Count)
    {
        // Vector256 code path
    }
    else if (Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<byte>.Count)
    {
        // Vector128 code path
    }
    else
    {
        // non-vectorized && small inputs code path
    }
}
```

To reduce the number of comparisons for small inputs, we can re-arrange it in the following way:

```cs
void OptimalCodeStructure(ReadOnlySpan<byte> buffer)
{
    if (!Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated || buffer.Length < Vector128<byte>.Count)
    { 
        // scalar code path
    } 
    else if (!Vector256.IsHardwareAccelerated || buffer.Length < Vector256<byte>.Count)
    { 
        // Vector128 code path
    } 
    else
    { 
        // Vector256 code path
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Is it worth just giving this as a single example here and pushing devs towards it as the implementation?

The only "downside" is that it may require duplication of logic to handle any "trailing elements" that don't fit into the vector, where-as with the first approach you can have the vector path fall into the `else` path to handle the trailing data to simplify your code.

No preference, there are upsides and downsides to each.

> **Both vector types provide almost identical features**, but arm64 hardware does not support `Vector256` yet, so for the sake of simplicity we will be using `Vector128` in all examples and assuming **little endian** architecture. Which means that all examples used in this document assume that they are being executed as part of the following `if` block:

Reviewer: nit: use `today` instead of `yet` as the latter may imply that support is coming:
```suggestion
**Both vector types provide almost identical features**, but arm64 hardware does not support `Vector256` today, so for the sake of simplicity we will be using `Vector128` in all examples and assuming **little endian** architecture. Which means that all examples used in this document assume that they are being executed as part of the following `if` block:
```

Also consider encouraging users to check `BitConverter.IsLittleEndian` which is also a JIT time constant whenever they do something that makes an assumption about endianness (not all algorithms do and so not all algorithms require such a check).

```cs
else if (Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<byte>.Count)
{
    // Vector128 code path
}
```

### Testing

Such a code structure requires us to **test all possible code paths**:

* `Vector256` is accelerated:
  * The input is large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector256`.
  * The input is not large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector256`, but it can benefit from vectorization with `Vector128`.
  * The input is too small to benefit from any kind of vectorization.
* `Vector128` is accelerated
  * The input is large enough to benefit from vectorization with `Vector128`.
  * The input is too small to benefit from any kind of vectorization.
* Neither `Vector128` or  `Vector256` are accelerated.

> It's possible to implement tests that cover some of the scenarios based on the size, but it's impossible to toggle hardware acceleration at the unit test level. It can be controlled with environment variables before .NET process is started:

Reviewer: It would be relatively simple for us to expose a `DOTNET_EnableVector128=0` (and same for `Vector<T>`, `Vector64/256/512<T>`) knob. Could you open an issue suggesting it?

We'd need to callout that its .NET 8 only, but this would help with testing, particularly across platforms.

    {
        config = config
            .AddJob(enough.WithId("Vector256"))
            .AddJob(enough.WithEnvironmentVariable("DOTNET_EnableAVX2", "0").WithId("Vector128"));

    }
    else if (Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated)
    {
        config = config.AddJob(enough.WithId("Vector128"));
    }

    BenchmarkSwitcher.FromAssembly(typeof(Program).Assembly)
        .Run(args, config);
}
```

**Note:** the config defines a [disassembler](https://adamsitnik.com/Disassembly-Diagnoser/), which exports a disassembly in GitHub markdown format (supported on both x64 and arm64, Windows and Linux). It is very often an invaluable tool when working with high-performance code where inspecting generated assembly code is required.

#### Memory alignment

BenchmarkDotNet does a lot of heavy lifting for the end users, but it cannot protect us from the random memory alignment which can be different per each benchmark run and can affect the stability of the benchmarks.

We have three possibilities:

* We can enforce the alignment ourselves and have very stable results.
* We can ask the harness to try to randomize the memory and observe the entire possible distribution with each run.

> * We can do nothing and wonder why the results vary from time to time.

Reviewer: possible rewording?
```suggestion
* We can do nothing and wonder why the results have additional noise across many runs
```

```cs
int Sum(Span<int> buffer)
{
    Debug.Assert(Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<int>.Count);

    // The initial sum is zero, so we need a vector with all elements initialized to zero.
    Vector128<int> sum = Vector128<int>.Zero;

    // We need to obtain the reference to first value in the buffer, it's used later for loading vectors from memory.
    ref int searchSpace = ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(buffer);
    // And an offset, that is going to be used by vectorized and scalar loops.
    nuint elementOffset = 0;
    // And the last valid offset from which we can load the values
    nuint oneVectorAwayFromEnd = (nuint)(buffer.Length - Vector128<int>.Count);
    for (; elementOffset <= oneVectorAwayFromEnd; elementOffset += (nuint)Vector128<int>.Count)
    {
        // We load a vector from given offset.
        Vector128<int> loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, elementOffset);
        // We add 4 integers at a time:
        sum += loaded;
    }

    // We sum all 4 integers from the vector to one
    int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

    // And handle the remaining elements, in a non-vectorized way:

>     while (elementOffset < (nuint)buffer.Length)

Reviewer: The alternative here (and what is typically better for performance) is to backtrack, load one more vectors worth of data, and mask off any elements already processed.

This may be out of scope for the intent of the document at this point, but it might be worth calling out there are alternatives and possibly linking to an "advanced" section that covers such things.

    {
        result += buffer[(int)elementOffset];
        elementOffset++;
    }

    return result;
}
```

**Note:** Use `ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(span)` instead of `ref span[0]` and `ref MemoryMarshal.GetArrayDataReference(array)` instead of `ref array[0]` to handle empty buffer scenarios (which would throw `IndexOutOfRangeException`). If the buffer is empty, these methods return a reference to the location where the 0th element would have been stored. Such a reference may or may not be null. You can use it for pinning but you must never dereference it.

> **Note:** The `GetReference` method has an overload that accepts a `ReadOnlySpan` and returns mutable reference. Please use it with caution! To get a `readonly` reference, you need to use [ReadOnlySpan<T>.GetPinnableReference](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.readonlyspan-1.getpinnablereference).

Reviewer: You don't "need" to use `GetPinnableReference`. The latter just guarantees you only have a `readonly` reference.

You can still do `ref readonly T searchSpace = ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(buffer)` to get a readonly reference otherwise.

**Note:** Please keep in mind that `Vector128.Sum` is a static method. `Vectior128<T>` and `Vector256<T>` provide both instance and static methods (operators like `+` are just static methods in C#). `Vector128` and `Vector256` are non-generic static classes with static methods only. It's important to know about their existence when searching for methods.

### Vectorized remainder handling

Now imagine that we need to check whether the given buffer contains a specific number. In this case, processing some values more than once is acceptable, we don't need to handle the remainder in a non-vectorized fashion.

> Example: a buffer contains six 32-bit integers, `Vector128` is accelerated, and it can work with four integers at a time. In the first loop iteration, we handle the first four elements. In the second (and last) iteration we need to handle the remaining two elements. Since the remainder is smaller than one `Vector128` and we are not mutating the input, we perform a vectorized operation on a `Vector128` containing the last four elements.

Reviewer: Consider:
```suggestion
Example: a buffer contains six 32-bit integers, `Vector128` is accelerated, and it can work with four integers at a time. In the first loop iteration, we handle the first four elements. In the second (and last) iteration we need to handle the remaining two elements. Since the remainder is smaller than one `Vector128` and we are not mutating the input or using the inputs in a way that changes the result, we perform a vectorized operation on a `Vector128` containing the last four elements.
```

The "technical" term is the operation is "idempotent"

    Vector128<int> values = Vector128.Create(searched);

    ref int searchSpace = ref MemoryMarshal.GetReference(buffer);
    nuint oneVectorAwayFromEnd = (nuint)(buffer.Length - Vector128<int>.Count);
    nuint elementOffset = 0;
    for (; elementOffset <= oneVectorAwayFromEnd; elementOffset += (nuint)Vector128<int>.Count)
    {
        loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, elementOffset);
        // compare the loaded vector with searched value vector
        if (Vector128.Equals(loaded, values) != Vector128<int>.Zero)
        {
            return true; // return true if a difference was found
        }
    }

    // If any elements remain, process the last vector in the search space.
    if (elementOffset != (uint)buffer.Length)
    {
        loaded = Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref searchSpace, oneVectorAwayFromEnd);
        if (Vector128.Equals(loaded, values) != Vector128<int>.Zero)
        {
            return true;
        }
    }

    return false;
}
```

`Vector128.Create(value)` creates a new vector with all elements initialized to the specified value. So `Vector128<int>.Zero` is equivalent to `Vector128.Create(0)`.

> `Vector128.Equals(Vector128 left, Vector128 right)` compares two vectors and returns a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on if the provided elements in left and right were equal. If the result of comparison is non zero, it means that there was at least one match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Vector128.Equals(Vector128 left, Vector128 right)` compares two vectors and returns a vector where each elements is either all-bits-set or zero depending on if the corresponding elements in left and right were equal. If the result of comparison is non zero, it means that there was at least one match.
```

    public static Vector128<T> LoadUnsafe<T>(ref T source, nuint elementOffset) where T : struct;
}
```

The first three overloads require a pointer to the source. To be able to use a pointer to a managed buffer in a safe way, the buffer needs to be pinned first. This is because the GC cannot track unmanaged pointers. It needs help to ensure that it doesn't move the memory while you're using it, as the pointers would silently become invalid. The tricky part here is doing the pointer arithmetic right:

```cs
unsafe int UnmanagedPointersSum(Span<int> buffer)
{
    fixed (int* pBuffer = buffer)
    {
        int* pEnd = pBuffer + buffer.Length;
        int* pOneVectorFromEnd = pEnd - Vector128<int>.Count;
        int* pCurrent = pBuffer;

        Vector128<int> sum = Vector128<int>.Zero;

        while (pCurrent <= pOneVectorFromEnd)
        {
            sum += Vector128.Load(pCurrent);

            pCurrent += Vector128<int>.Count;
        }

        int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

        while (pCurrent < pEnd)
        {
            result += *pCurrent;

            pCurrent++;
        }

        return result;
    }
}
```

> `LoadAligned` and `LoadAlignedNonTemporal` require the input to be aligned. Aligned reads and writes should be slightly faster but using them comes at a price of increased complexity.

Reviewer: Might be worth calling out that `NonTemporal` means that the hardware is allowed to bypass the cache. This can help provide a speedup when working with very large amounts of data as it avoids repeatedly filling the cache with values that will never be used again.

The fourth method expects only a managed reference (`ref T source`). We don't need to pin the buffer (GC is tracking managed references and updates them if memory gets moved), but it still requires us to properly handle managed pointer arithmetic:

```cs
int ManagedReferencesSum(int[] buffer)
{
    Debug.Assert(Vector128.IsHardwareAccelerated && buffer.Length >= Vector128<int>.Count);

    ref int current = ref MemoryMarshal.GetArrayDataReference(buffer);
    ref int end = ref Unsafe.Add(ref current, buffer.Length);
    ref int oneVectorAwayFromEnd = ref Unsafe.Subtract(ref end, Vector128<int>.Count);

    Vector128<int> sum = Vector128<int>.Zero;

    while (!Unsafe.IsAddressGreaterThan(ref current, ref oneVectorAwayFromEnd))
    {
        sum += Vector128.LoadUnsafe(ref current);

        current = ref Unsafe.Add(ref current, Vector128<int>.Count);
    }

    int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

    while (Unsafe.IsAddressLessThan(ref current, ref end))
    {
        result += current;

        current = ref Unsafe.Add(ref current, 1);

>     }

Reviewer: nit: It is much preferred to use `LoadUnsafe(ref bufferStart, index)` over using `Unsafe.Add`

It is very easy to get `Unsafe.Add` wrong, particularly with moving the `ref` outside the GC tracked region for the buffer. We have written a few bugs in that space ourselves.

`LoadUnsafe(ref T address, nuint index)` pushes users towards writing code that is less prone to this general issue and is overall easier to adapt to from a simpler `for` loop that the scalar logic may be using.

Reviewer: -- I see we touch on this below, I think it would be much clearer to cover the "appropriate" way to do it here first in the normal reading order and then to cover things like this in a separate "what not to do and why" section.

Author: > I see we touch on this below, I think it would be much clearer to cover the "appropriate" way to do it here first in the normal reading order and then to cover things like this in a separate "what not to do and why" section.

That is why in the paragraph above (`Loops`), where I need to load the values, I am using the recommended way (so it's the first thing the users see). In this paragraph, I start on purpose with the "wrong" way, just to point out the disadvantages, move on & repat and at the end I mention the recommended approach.

    // from now on we can use Vector128<short> or Vector256<short>
}
```

Or [MemoryMarshal.Cast<TFrom, TTo>](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.memorymarshal.cast#system-runtime-interopservices-memorymarshal-cast-2(system-readonlyspan((-0)))), which casts a span of one primitive type to a span of another primitive type:

```cs
void CastingSpans(Span<char> chars)
{
    Span<short> shorts = MemoryMarshal.Cast<char, short>(chars);
}
```

It's also possible to get managed references from unmanaged pointers:

```cs
void PointerToReference(char* pUtf16Buffer, byte* pAsciiBuffer)
{
    // of the same type:
    ref byte asciiBuffer = ref *pAsciiBuffer;
    // of different types:
    ref ushort utf16Buffer = ref *(ushort*)pUtf16Buffer;
}
```

It's only safe to convert a managed reference to a pointer if it's known that the reference is already pinned. If it's not, the moment after you get the pointer it could be invalid.

## Mindset

Vectorizing real-world algorithms seems complex at the beginning. And what do software engineers do with complex problems? We break them down into sub-problems until these become simple enough to be solved directly.

> Let's implement a vectorized method for checking whether a given byte buffer consists only from valid ASCII characters to see how similar problems can be solved.

Reviewer: I think it would be better to have the example of vectorization earlier in the doc.

Basically:
1. Brief introduction to what vectors are and what .NET provides at a high level
2. An example of taking a scalar algorithm and vectorizing it, showing perf wins and touching briefly on what we did
3. A more in depth coverage of the APIs we provide, best practices, etc
4. A more in depth coverage of what not to do and why
5. Optionally some coverage of advanced topics/scenarios, such as handling trailing elements or alignment efficiently

Reviewer: This different ordering would walk users through a very natural process introducing key terms, giving an example of what can be done, and then breaking it apart and going into more detail.

As we have it now, there is a lot of detail up front before we ever get into showing a user the "simple example" of taking a scalar algorithm and vectorizing it.

Author: > I think it would be better to have the example of vectorization earlier in the doc.

In a way we already have that, as in the "Loops" paragraph I provide a working `Sum` and `Contains` method implementations with comments.

I've spent a lot of time thinking about your recommendation and I believe it's a good one, but I would prefer to keep the existing order.

My main motivation is to prevent the readers from running into various traps, so I really want them to read the whole document. I am hoping that with the current structure, our target readers are going to learn something interesting in every paragraph, which is going to keep them focused and reach the end without missing anything.

With your proposal, I am afraid that some of the readers could skip some parts of it and run into issues later.

* It does not need to throw any argument exceptions, as `ReadOnlySpan` is `struct` and it can never be `null` or invalid.
* It should return `true` for an empty buffer.
* It should detect invalid characters in the entire buffer, including the remainder.
* It should not read any bytes that don't belong to the provided buffer.

### Scalar solution

Once we know all edge cases, we need to understand our problem and find a scalar solution.

ASCII characters are values in the range from `0` to `127` (inclusive). It means that we can find invalid ASCII bytes by just searching for values that are larger than `127`. If we treat `byte` (unsigned, range from 0 to 255) as `sbyte` (signed, range from -128 to 127), it's a matter of performing "is less than zero" check.

The binary representation of 0-127 range is following:

```log
00000000
01111111
^
most significant bit
```

When we look at it, we can realize that another way is checking whether the most significant bit is equal `1`. For the scalar version, we could perform a logical AND:

```cs

> bool IsValidAscii(byte c) => (c & 0b1000_0000) == 0;

Author: My point was to show that even for such a simple problem there are many different solutions. I also wanted to demo as many APIs as possible`.

```

> ### Vectorized solution

Reviewer 2: You never finish the vectorized IsAscii implementation. There should be a complete `static bool IsAscii(ReadOnlySpan<byte>)` or similar method that does everything the "right" way.

### Creation

Each of the vector types provides a `Create` method that accepts a single value and returns a vector with all elements initialized to this value.

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Create<T>(T value) where T : struct;
```

`CreateScalar` initializes first element to the specified value, and the remaining elements to zero.

```cs
public static Vector128<int> CreateScalar(int value);
```

`CreateScalarUnsafe` is similar, but the remaining elements are left uninitialized. It's dangerous!

We also have an overload that allows for specifying every value in given vector:

```cs
public static Vector128<short> Create(short e0, short e1, short e2, short e3, short e4, short e5, short e6, short e7)
```

And last but not least we have a `Create` overload which accepts a buffer. It creates a vector with its elements set to the first `VectorXYZ<T>.Count` elements of the buffer. It's not recommended to use it in a loop, where `Load` methods should be used instead (for performance).

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Create<T>(ReadOnlySpan<T> values) where T : struct

> ```

Reviewer: The span overloads require slicing as well as corresponding bounds checks and other things each iteration. This can sometimes be hoisted by the JIT, but it isn't always trivial to do so and the overhead can add up.

to perform a copy in the other direction, we can use one of the `CopyTo` extension methods:

```cs
public static void CopyTo<T>(this Vector128<T> vector, Span<T> destination) where T : struct
```

### Bit operations

All size-specific vector types provide a set of APIs for common bit operations.

> `BitwiseAnd` computes the bitwise-and of two vectors, `BitwiseOr` computes the bitwise-or of two vectors. They can both be expressed by using the corresponding operators (`&` and `|`). The same goes for `Xor` which can be expressed with `^` operator and `Negate` (`~`).

Reviewer: The operators should be preferred where possible, as it helps avoid bugs around operator precedence and can improve readability.

```cs
public static Vector128<T> BitwiseAnd<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct => left & right;
public static Vector128<T> BitwiseOr<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct => left | right;
public static Vector128<T> Xor<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left ^ right;
public static Vector128<T> Negate<T>(Vector128<T> vector) => ~vector;
```

`AndNot` computes the bitwise-and of a given vector and the ones' complement of another vector.

```cs

> public static Vector128<T> AndNot<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left & ~right;

Reviewer: The pattern `left & ~right` should also get implicitly optimized as `AndNot` in .NET 8+

```

`ShiftLeft` shifts each element of a vector left by the specified number of bits.

> `ShiftRightArithmetic` performs a **signed** shift right and `ShiftRightLogical` performs an **unsigned** shift:

Reviewer: These likewise have operators in .NET 8: `<<`, `>>`, and `>>>`

```

`Equals` compares two vectors to determine if they are equal on a per-element basis. It returns a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on whether the corresponding elements in the `left` and `right` arguments were equal.

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Equals<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

How do we calculate the index of the first match? Let's take a closer look at the result of following equality check:

```cs
Vector128<int> left = Vector128.Create(1, 2, 3, 4);
Vector128<int> right = Vector128.Create(0, 0, 3, 0);
Vector128<int> equals = Vector128.Equals(left, right);
Console.WriteLine(equals);
```

```log
<0, 0, -1, 0>
```

`-1` is just `0xFFFFFFFF` (all-bits-set). We could use `GetElement` to get the first non-zero element.

```cs
public static T GetElement<T>(this Vector128<T> vector, int index) where T : struct
```

But it would not be an optimal solution. We should instead extract the most significant bits:

```cs
uint mostSignificantBits = equals.ExtractMostSignificantBits();
Console.WriteLine(Convert.ToString(mostSignificantBits, 2).PadLeft(32, '0'));
```

```log
00000000000000000000000000000100
```

> and use [BitOperations.TrailingZeroCount](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.numerics.bitoperations.trailingzerocount) to get the trailing zero count.

Reviewer: In .NET 7+, you can also simply use `int.TrailingZeroCount(x)`. It is a bit more accessible and there are corresponding functions on `uint`, `long`, `ulong`, and the other primitive integer types.

The same goes for `LeadingZeroCount` and a few other APIs introduced as part of generic math.

public static bool GreaterThanOrEqualAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanOrEqualAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanOrEqualAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

Similarly to `Equals`, vector-returning overloads return a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on whether the corresponding elements in `left` and `right` meet the given condition.

```cs
public static Vector128<T> GreaterThan<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static Vector128<T> GreaterThanOrEqual<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static Vector128<T> LessThan<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static Vector128<T> LessThanOrEqual<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

`ConditionalSelect` Conditionally selects a value from two vectors on a bitwise basis.

```cs

> public static Vector128<T> ConditionalSelect<T>(Vector128<T> condition, Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right)

Reviewer: You might show that this is basically `(left & condition) | (right & ~condition)`

```

This method deserves a self-describing example:

```cs
Vector128<float> left = Vector128.Create(1.0f, 2, 3, 4);
Vector128<float> right = Vector128.Create(4.0f, 3, 2, 1);

Vector128<float> result = Vector128.ConditionalSelect(Vector128.GreaterThan(left, right), left, right);

Assert.Equal(Vector128.Create(4.0f, 3, 3, 4), result);
```

### Math

Very simple math operations can be also expressed by using the operators:

```cs
public static Vector128<T> Add<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct => left + right;
public static Vector128<T> Divide<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left / right;
public static Vector128<T> Divide<T>(Vector128<T> left, T right) => left / right;
public static Vector128<T> Multiply<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left * right;
public static Vector128<T> Multiply<T>(Vector128<T> left, T right) => left * right;

> public static Vector128<T> Subtract<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) => left - right;

Reviewer: Same as above, the operators should be preferred where possible, as it helps avoid bugs around operator precedence and can improve readability.

public static unsafe Vector128<uint> ConvertToUInt32(Vector128<float> vector)
public static unsafe Vector128<ulong> ConvertToUInt64(Vector128<double> vector)
```

And for reinterpretation (no values are being changed, they can be just used as if they were of a different type):

```cs
public static Vector128<TTo> As<TFrom, TTo>(this Vector128<TFrom> vector)
public static Vector128<byte> AsByte<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<double> AsDouble<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<short> AsInt16<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<int> AsInt32<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<long> AsInt64<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<nint> AsNInt<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<nuint> AsNUInt<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<sbyte> AsSByte<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<float> AsSingle<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<ushort> AsUInt16<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<uint> AsUInt32<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)
public static Vector128<ulong> AsUInt64<T>(this Vector128<T> vector)

> ```

Author: I've used some of these methods in the previous sections (`AsSBytes` for doing the ASCII check for example) and I was hoping that it's enough. Should I repeat this example anyway here?

`Avx2.Shuffle` is effectively `2x128-bit ops` while `Vector256.Shuffle` treats it as a "single 256-bit vector" (rather than "2x128-bit vectors"). This was done for consistency and to better map to a cross-platform mentality where `AVX-512` and `SVE` all operate on "full width".

## Summary

The main goal of the new `Vector128` and `Vector256` APIs is to make writing fast, vectorized code possible without becoming familiar with hardware-specific instructions and becoming an assembly language expert. Our recommendations depend on your current expertise level, software you maintain and the one you need to create:

- If you are already an expert and you have vectorized your code for both `x64/x86` and `arm64/arm` code you can use the new APIs to simplify your code, but you most likely won't observe any performance gains. [#64451](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/64451) lists the places where it was/can be done in dotnet/runtime. You can use links to the merged PRs to see real-life examples.
- If you have already vectorized your code, but only for `x64/x86` or `arm64/arm`, you can use the  new APIs to have a single, cross-platform implementation.

> - If you have already vectorized your code with `Vector<T>` you can use the new APIs to check if they can produce better codegen.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to say more about this, and in particular any benefits that might come from using Vector128 and Vector256 on a machine where Vector would map to the latter?

- If you are not familiar with hardware specific instructions or you are about to vectorize a scalar algorithm, you should start with the new `Vector128` and `Vector256` APIs. Get a solid and working implementation and eventually consider using hardware-specific methods for performance critical code paths.

### Best practices

1. Implement tests that cover all code paths, including Access Violations.
2. Run tests for all hardware acceleration scenarios, use the existing environment variables to do that.
3. Implement benchmarks that mimic real life scenarios, do not increase the complexity of your code when it's not beneficial for your end users.

> 4. Prefer managed references over unsafe pointers to avoid pinning and safety issues.

Reviewer 2: Is this our guidance?  There are safety issues with refs as well, and there's a class of bugs that pinning helps avoid.

Author: From my perspective managed references are lesser evil when compared to pointers. 

@tannergooding what  is your opinion on this?

Reviewer: Both are dangerous to use incorrectly and each comes with their own tradeoffs.

`pointers` are typically the safest and least problematic to get wrong because you can write natural C# syntax to do what you want. The biggest concern is that pinning for very long periods of time can negatively impact the GC, because it can't compact or otherwise move the pinned data.

`references` are greatly improved in .NET 7+ where you can use `LoadUnsafe(ref address, index)` and `StoreUnsafe(Ref address, index)` as it can help avoid the problematic classes of bugs. They allow the GC to work at its best, but that can cause additional run to run variance and can change the alignment of your data partway through.

        while (pCurrent <= pOneVectorFromEnd)
        {
            sum += Vector128.Load(pCurrent);

            pCurrent += Vector128<int>.Count;
        }

        int result = Vector128.Sum(sum);

        while (pCurrent < pEnd)
        {
            result += *pCurrent;

            pCurrent++;
        }

        return result;
    }
}
```

`LoadAligned` and `LoadAlignedNonTemporal` require the input to be aligned. Aligned reads and writes should be slightly faster but using them comes at a price of increased complexity. "NonTemporal" means that the hardware is allowed (but not required) to bypass the cache. Non-temporal reads provide a speedup when working with very large amounts of data as it avoids repeatedly filling the cache with values that will never be used again.

Currently .NET exposes only one API for allocating unmanaged aligned memory: [NativeMemory.AlignedAlloc](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.nativememory.alignedalloc). In the future, we might provide [a dedicated API](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/27146) for allocating managed, aligned and hence pinned memory buffers.

> The alternative to creating aligned buffers (we don't always have the control over input) is to pin the buffer, find first aligned address, handle non-aligned elements, then start aligned loop and afterwards handle the remainder. Adding such complexity to our code is hardly ever worth it and needs to be proved with proper benchmarking on various hardware.

Author: ```suggestion
The alternative to creating aligned buffers (we don't always have the control over input) is to pin the buffer, find first aligned address, handle non-aligned elements, then start aligned loop and afterwards handle the remainder. Adding such complexity to our code may not always be worth it and needs to be proved with proper benchmarking on various hardware.
```

public static bool GreaterThanOrEqualAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanOrEqualAll<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static bool LessThanOrEqualAny<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

Similarly to `Equals`, vector-returning overloads return a vector whose elements are all-bits-set or zero, depending on whether the corresponding elements in `left` and `right` meet the given condition.

```csharp
public static Vector128<T> GreaterThan<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static Vector128<T> GreaterThanOrEqual<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static Vector128<T> LessThan<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
public static Vector128<T> LessThanOrEqual<T>(Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right) where T : struct
```

`ConditionalSelect` Conditionally selects a value from two vectors on a bitwise basis.

```csharp

> public static Vector128<T> ConditionalSelect<T>(Vector128<T> condition, Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right)

Author: ```suggestion
public static Vector128<T> ConditionalSelect<T>(Vector128<T> condition, Vector128<T> left, Vector128<T> right)
    => (left & condition) | (right & ~condition);
```

- If you are already an expert and you have vectorized your code for both `x64/x86` and `arm64/arm` code you can use the new APIs to simplify your code, but you most likely won't observe any performance gains. [#64451](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/64451) lists the places where it was/can be done in dotnet/runtime. You can use links to the merged PRs to see real-life examples.
- If you have already vectorized your code, but only for `x64/x86` or `arm64/arm`, you can use the  new APIs to have a single, cross-platform implementation.
- If you have already vectorized your code with `Vector<T>` you can use the new APIs to check if they can produce better code-gen.
- If you are not familiar with hardware specific instructions or you are about to vectorize a scalar algorithm, you should start with the new `Vector128` and `Vector256` APIs. Get a solid and working implementation and eventually consider using hardware-specific methods for performance critical code paths.

> - Both managed references and unsafe pointers are dangerous to use incorrectly and each comes with their own tradeoff.

Author: > Prefer managed references over unsafe pointers to avoid pinning and safety issues.

I've removed this point from the Best practices and added following sentence to the Summary:

> Both managed references and unsafe pointers are dangerous to use incorrectly and each comes with their own tradeoff.
